(Ignacio Chapela)
It is extremely rare
to have a planet
where there is soil.
As this living crust
that is smeared
over the surface of our planet.
Most of the planet
is not living.
It's mineral.
It's never known life,
it's just this rock.
And yet soil starts
forming on it
and creates this crust,
this very thin layer
where life is possible.
This is where it all starts.
Right here from the glacier
that has been scouring the rock,
grinding it to a fine dust,
pulling out the nutrients,
and releasing them
into this water
that comes from
right under the glacier.
There is no organic material
in this.
This is mineral.
Beautiful in color.
And beautiful to feel
on your hands.
It really is
the beginning of the soil.
This rock has been ground
to such a fine texture
that it remains
suspended in the water.
They will remain suspended
for such a long time
that they will manage
to get all the way to the sea.
Soil supports me
on this precarious ledge
where we can see
life gaining upon the mineral
basis of the planet.
The nutrients of the rock,
being transferred
into the living layer,
that is the soil that supports
that plant and other life.
And building up life
to make soil thicker
and thicker,
as life complexes upon itself.
This type of material
you get in your garden
when you buy peat moss,
the famous sphagnum moss,
the one that holds
mammoths and...
all kinds of things
like in a huge refrigerator
without decomposing.
This sphagnum moss produces acid
that keeps things from
breaking down, from decomposing.
Very exciting to be putting
your hands
into very old carbon that
was accumulated here
by photosynthesis.
One can go down
thousands of years in this,
[sighing]
that could be
tens of meters deep.
This has no mineral,
no rock, no clay, no sand.
It’s just living things
growing on themselves,
soil that is
completely biological.
Here, water and land are having
a dialogue of nutrients.
The nutrients that were in the
water are being pulled out
by the waves, the wind,
the currents,
but also by the uplifting
of the land.
The coral that trapped
the nutrients from the ocean
is coming up...
here at the edge,
and making all these nutrients
available,
back for terrestrial ecosystems.
These corals have trapped carbon
in the form of CO2 that
was dissolved in the water,
as well as calcium,
which is a very important
nutrient for plant life,
and has made it
into solid skeletons
that form the body
of the coral reef.
And as it becomes
smaller and smaller,
thinner and thinner,
it becomes sand,
one of the three
important elements of soil.
(Ignacio Chapela)
After soils are born,
they have a life
and we can see that life
develop in places like Hawaii,
where each island was formed
at a different time.
[lava boiling]
[lava spewing]
What makes Hawaii
such a great place
to study and
understand soils is,
first of all, the volcano.
You can go from places where
the volcano is active
and the rock was
hot yesterday
to places where you have soils
being affected by life
for 5 million years.
The Kilauea Iki,
the small crater,
is on the other side
of the cinder cone?
Right on the other side there.
The 1959 eruption
of Kilauea Volcano...
the lava was fountaining as high
as 1900 feet in the air.
When the molten lava
went up that high,
the trade winds, like today,
blew it out of the fountain
and then blew it here
in a shadow that goes on
for another couple of miles,
decreasing depths
of this tephra.
So we have 9 feet of new rock
over this area
that came down 50 years ago.
This hasn’t been
shaped by life yet.
As you go higher,
the weather,
the water and the life
have begun to operate
on the rock
and make it into really a soil
that shaped by
the interaction of climate
and organisms
and the rock itself.
The eruption 300 years ago
made a deposit of tephra
very much like the one that was
50 years old in the other place.
But of course it’s had 250 years
more for a forest to develop.
And if you look up,
you can see that
the canopy’s kind of open here.
Once you have
a complete plant cover,
of course the soil can’t heat up
as much as it did
in the other place.
And the environment
is ameliorated,
and it’s good
for all kinds of life.
[birds singing]
This soil here is some tens
of thousands of years old.
So compared to what
we were seeing yesterday,
which was a few
hundred years old,
that's the oldest
of the ones we saw,
it’s had tens
of thousands of years
for the rock to break down,
the minerals to come out,
to become available to plants,
for nitrogen to be accumulated
from the atmosphere.
And at this point, we have
this extraordinarily rich soil
that can support any kind
of plant growth in abundance.
This lava that
I’m digging into now
is about 350,000 years old.
And you can see
how wet the soil is here.
Water is moving through the soil
and then hitting the rock,
and then beginning
to move down slope.
And after 150,000
to 350,000 years,
many of the elements
have been washed out of the soil
because it’s so wet here.
Kauai is the oldest of
the high Hawaiian Islands.
As these islands are impacted by
rainfall over long time periods,
a tremendous amount
of erosion goes on.
Oh my gosh,
look at that root mat!
We’ve got about 6 inches here
of organic mat
with roots just all through it.
I think it just indicates how
nutrient-poor this forest is.
We're out 4 million years,
the plants are really poor
in nutrients,
so they’re putting roots
through the area of
the decomposing organic matter,
trying to get at
whatever is released
when it decomposes.
One of the fundamental
end products
of the long-term
weathering of soils
is an accumulation of clays.
And these clays are
very, very small.
And so as more and more
of the clays pack in there,
then the ability of that water
to move
through the soil becomes
more and more limited.
So if there’s any slope
to the land at all,
which there is on almost
all these lava flows,
then the water’s going to start
to move laterally,
and as it moves laterally then,
it will tend to drive
more erosion.
And it tends to create
fairly narrow steep canyons.
And then over time, the canyons
widen by the walls falling in.
So as one moves across
the Hawaiian islands
and you’re getting to older
and older volcanoes,
those volcanoes are becoming
more and more
eroded as time goes on.
And that’s partly just
a function of the time
that rain has been
falling on them,
but it’s also driven by
this internal change
or development
in the soil structure
and processes that are going on.
Soils have parents
just like we have parents.
So they came from somewhere.
Soils form from some material
that's in a particular location.
So in this location,
we had windblown sediments
that came in,
and you have
these loose sediments,
that are mostly
silt-sized particles,
called loess, L-O-E-S-S,
with some clay and some sand,
and then soil forms.
That kind of material
is transported.
It's transported parent material
because it came in by the wind.
Other types of parent material
can come in by the water.
You can have
rivers that overflow,
like along the Mississippi,
they deposit alluvium.
Water rushes out
of a mountain range,
it might drop a lot of material
like in an alluvial fan,
when they deposit that material
new soils form in that material.
And then we also have
glacially-transported materials,
soils that formed
in glacial sediment.
When those glaciers melt,
they drop the material.
We also have soils that
are not transported.
We have soils
that form in place.
Right where we're standing now,
we're on a butte,
kind of an old mountain range.
This particular mountain,
the soils formed
from rock in place.
It was exposed after
probably a million years,
we had a soil that actually
formed in that rock.
And the easiest way to see this
is you can go to Europe...
I saw this castle and it was,
like 300 years old,
it was stone and at the surface,
you could see
a couple inches of soil
that had formed.
Those kinds of soils take
a very long time to form.
So transported soils,
I’m guessing 70%-75%
of our soils formed in
transported parent material.
And then another 25% formed
in soils that are in place,
lot of those
are up in the mountains.
There's an incredible diversity
of soils on the planet.
There’s not just
one kind of good dirt.
If you go to different climates,
you'll find very different
kinds of soils,
and consequently, different
kinds of plant communities
that are adapted to
growing on those soils.
A lot of people look at a forest
and think "oh wow,"
"forest soil’s the most
productive in the world."
Most of the organic matter
is in the standing vegetation,
it’s not in the soil.
Prairie soil’s the most productive.
It's that vegetation,
the grasses that have
these deep fibrous roots,
and they're constantly
sloughing, dying off,
putting more organic matter
in the soil.
That’s what you have here.
They make
the most productive soils.
Because of
the prairie soil formation,
they have really good structure,
water can infiltrate easily
from the surface
down into the soil.
They store water well
in most cases.
In the world maybe 7%
of the landscape
is in mollisols.
In the United States,
we have about 22.5%.
So we have more,
we have 3 times our fair share.
Alfisols.
They may be in general the
second most productive order.
In the world,
there’s probably 12%.
The United States lucked out,
we have 18% -19%,
17%, alfisols.
So we have
more than our average.
Well, if we have 22.5% mollisols
in the US,
and another 18% alfisols,
40% of our soils
are the two best orders.
That's incredible.
Soil is the interface between
biology and geology.
It’s sort of the living skin
of the Earth.
We're in the Palouse,
and we're in a wheat field,
and most people would think,
"we're on top of a soil."
And this is what most people
see in soil. They walk on it,
but if you look more closely
and you look beneath me,
we have 30-40 inches
of today’s soil
that’s being farmed
over 30 inches
of a prehistoric soil,
over another 30 inches
of prehistoric soil
and it just keeps going down.
As I stand on a piece of land,
it’s easy for me to forget that
the soil under my feet
is only 50% solid.
50% of that soil is actually
empty spaces,
the soil pores
that are filled with air,
water vapor and
a small amount of liquid water.
And it is within these spaces
that living organisms
actually thrive.
It is this small fraction that
keeps nutrients flowing,
regulates and drives
the functioning of the soil,
and therefore, the functioning
of the whole ecosystem.
It's Times Square
on New Year's Eve
all the time in the soil.
When you take that soil and
you put it under a microscope
and you start looking,
it’s a place full of life.
There’s so many microorganisms
in one gram of soil
that 70% to 80% of them still
have never been identified.
So literally you have...
Soil is more properly viewed
is sort of like this ecosystem.
It’s a living thing.
Carbon dioxide in the air
is captured by plants,
and using the power of sunlight,
this carbon dioxide is
transformed into carbohydrates
by the process
called photosynthesis.
Once carbon is fixed
into carbohydrates,
it is available to become
the many molecules
that feed and form
the living organisms
of the soil.
When you're looking at the
above ground part of the plant
that most people see and
the roots down into the soil,
that plant is putting out foods.
Every bit of the surface
of that plant
is pouring out foods
to feed the proper sets
of microorganisms
in the balances
that the plant requires.
So it's putting out what's
called in the scientific world,
"exudates."
The fruit, the blossoms,
all of the surface leaves, bark,
stems, everything on that plant
is putting out an exudate
for the purpose of
growing bacteria and fungi.
And that's really
the only reason
that plants are putting
those foods out.
Down in the root system,
all of the roots
the structural roots,
the lateral roots, the
root hairs, the fine roots...
They're all putting out foods
to feed the bacteria and fungi.
And of course
if a plant was putting out food
that would feed
a disease-causing organism,
the plant would be dead.
So when this plant growing
its roots through the soil
starts pumping out
all this food,
the bacteria grow,
the fungi grow,
and we have now a million
million bacteria per teaspoon
of soil around that root system.
We have miles and miles
and miles of fungal hyphae
around the root system.
So we've got a castle wall.
We're protecting.
And if the plant's
doing that, how's it doing it?
Through the exudates, the foods
that it's putting out.
Simple sugars,
protein,
and then carbohydrate.
What is that a recipe for?
Cakes and cookies.
So your plant is dumping
cakes and cookies
all over its surface,
every single surface,
putting out cakes and cookies,
to feed these bacteria and fungi
so they grow
to really high numbers
and are protecting
that root system
from all of the diseases that
would be trying to come in.
So in a healthy soil that
has the proper set of biology,
that plant is gonna
be able to grow
everything it needs
to grow to protect that root.
And if we've got all these
bacteria and fungi growing,
here come the predators
of the bacteria and fungi.
And when a protozoan
eats a bacterium,
it releases nutrients
in a now plant-available form.
They release nitrogen,
phosphorus,
sulfur, magnesium, calcium,
iron, zinc, copper, you name it.
The whole list of nutrients
that your plant requires...
They release those nutrients
in a plant available form.
As long as we maintain
that biology in the soil.
This is one part of a massive
oxidation-reduction cycle,
and so you reduce the carbon
from the atmosphere
via photosynthesis,
and then that carbon is released
back to the atmosphere
by oxidation.
And most of that oxidation
is driven by microorganisms
that reside within the soil.
And so the soil is the zone
in which most organic material
produced by photosynthesis
is then broken down again
and the components
are being released.
So carbon dioxide’s being
released back to the atmosphere.
Nutrients are being released
back into the biological cycle
to be used again.
[match bursting into flame]
Phosphorus is a nutrient
that can only be found
in rocks, in the lithosphere.
The only way we have
is either to mine it
to great expense and
great amounts of energy,
or through the work of microbes,
especially fungi.
Let’s look underneath
the top layer of litter
which is undecomposed,
and then we find
the decomposing litter layer.
And immediately
you find roots...
[grunting]
There is a stone back here
that we’re going to pull up.
And against the stone is where
fungi are actively
mining
the nutrients out of the rock.
The microbial body
of the fungus,
called the mycelium,
penetrating through the crevices
where no plant could ever go,
finds that phosphorus atom
and pulls it out
through the crevices of the soil
to the mycorrhizal root tip.
Here, the phosphorus
is passed into the plant
and then transported
through these fine roots.
The root grows
in this very special form,
very special shape.
It’s a little bit like
reindeer antlers.
This is where the fungi
meet the tree.
Have a look
at the root tips.
This is neither plant
nor fungus,
but the point
where fungi and plant
find each other and interact
in this very intimate
relationship.
From here, that atom will move
through these fine roots
into thicker and thicker
and thicker roots,
until it joins
the secondary roots,
and it reaches into
the stream of sap
that is pulling
those nutrients up
through the trunk
and into the canopy,
where the leaves
need these nutrients.
More than 90% of land plants
have mycorrhizae
of one kind of another.
So it is the rule.
There would have been
no colonization
of the land from the ocean
without mycorrhizae,
without fungi.
Many of these fungi
produce a fruit body,
something we call a mushroom.
Nitrogen is a very
important element.
The green color of the plants,
the red color of our blood,
are signs of
our nitrogen content.
And yet nitrogen
is not easy to come by.
Nitrogen is available
in the air.
More than 70% of the actual
atmosphere that we breathe
is made of nitrogen, but
that nitrogen is very stable.
So it's difficult to activate
to become engaged
in the chemistry of life.
That activated nitrogen
out of the atmosphere
is only available when there are
very large electric charges,
or through a very important
and unique trick
that only a very specific group
of bacteria can play.
Plants have learned
how to establish a relationship
with those bacteria,
in which the plants have
provided an environment
for the bacteria to grow,
and the bacteria are able
to take the nitrogen
from the atmosphere and
turn it into its available form.
This all happens inside
the roots of certain plants,
like these lupines we have here.
They are...
something like a tumor that
was induced by the bacteria.
The bacteria start talking
to the root of the plant,
the root of the plant responds
by growing around the bacterium
and enclosing it inside.
The plant then
creates an environment
where these bacteria
can grow and can fix nitrogen.
I've taken a nodule out
from the plant root,
and I'm going to slice it
to reveal the place
where the bacteria are living,
where the nitrogen fixation
is actually happening.
You can see.
This red color
comes from a molecule
that is very close
to the hemoglobin in our blood.
If the activated nitrogen
comes in contact with oxygen,
it goes back
to its inactive form
and it’s impossible
for the plant to use it.
So for nitrogen to become
available to the plant world,
it has to be processed
by the bacteria
in the absence of oxygen.
And that's the great trick that
the plant learned how to do.
The peas, the beans,
all the legumes
have this type of nodule
and make it possible for agriculture
to take place
without the introduction of
artificial nitrogen
from a fertilizer.
When you look at the real things
that we're dealing with
on this earth at a molecular,
cellular level,
change is life.
So we're in constant change,
we're in constant creation.
It's that constant creation that
we get to help manage on a farm.
In a way, agriculture is
a dance with nature.
And it's about
timely intervention,
it's about understanding
the forces of nature,
maybe even learning
from the forest,
which is the world's
ultimate ecosystem.
And then, it's not exactly
improving on nature,
but it's recognizing that
you have to go with the laws,
but then if you act decisively
at the right moment,
you can get a surplus.
And in a way that's
what good farming is about.
And on this farm,
just to take this example,
this land is in good heart.
It's been farmed organically
for 30 years.
This is the fifth time 'round
in the rotation.
So we grow clover grass,
which is what this is,
to build fertility,
and that is either grazed
by our dairy cows
or it's cut for silage,
which we feed in winter.
And then when it reaches
the peak of fertility
with very high levels
of organic matter or humus,
we then plow it and we grow
a crop of carrots
followed by a crop of oats.
If we look at this crop now
which we're just not quite ready
to harvest,
but it's getting there.
You got these carrots,
which as you can see,
have done reasonably well.
For me what is amazing
about this soil
is it just feels so alive
and so vital.
Mother Nature
is not growing a forest
the same way
she's growing a grassland
or the same way she grows
a riparian system.
What's so different about
what's going on in a wetlands
as compared to
that high-mountain meadow
or the most beautiful meadow
you've ever seen in your life,
highly productive, or
that old-growth forest soil...
It's the biology in the soil.
That's what's different.
Maybe we need to mimic
that system
in the crops
that we're trying to grow.
If you're growing strawberries,
what's the system that
you should be looking at
to determine
what should be in my soil,
in order to grow
these strawberries
without pesticides
or inorganic fertilizers?
Where do the strawberries exist
out there in the real world?
And most people,
when you ask them
that question, they're gonna:
"Real world? Strawberries grow
in the real world?"
Yes...
Where do they come from
naturally,
where are they found
out in nature?
They're old-growth,
understory plant species.
So when you're trying to grow
a strawberry in sand
that has been sterilized,
in what way does that
possibly mimic
that old-growth forest soil?
We’ve gotta get that diversity
back into our soils.
If you want to grow
those tomatoes or potatoes
or grapes
or whatever you’re growing,
we’ve got to get that kind of
diversity back into the soil.
What you’ve got
out in the field,
if you've got a really good
biological field going,
you should have 50,000 protozoa
out there per a unit of soil,
a good-sized unit of soil.
And each one of those protozoa
eat 10,000 bacteria a day.
Each one's eating
10,000 bacteria a day.
So what happens
when they eat them?
Well, they poop 'em out,
so we call it the "poop loop."
What happens with the poop
is it goes into the field,
it becomes a fertilizer,
which is your nitrogen reserve
out there in the soil.
And you should have a nitrogen
reserve like a bank account
of 150 to 200 pounds,
300 pounds of nitrogen per acre,
depending on how good
your biology's going.
Which is enough to grow anything
with no fertilization.
For most of the 10,000 years
of the history of agriculture,
nitrogen had been the most
important limiting factor
to productivity.
The way my grandfather farmed is
he'd break up
a piece of prairie,
and he would grow wheat and
oats usually, sometimes corn,
until the nutrients
were depleted.
Then he would break up
a new piece of prairie.
That's not ecological farming,
that's sort of
slash-and-burn farming.
It wasn’t until
the early 20th century
that we were able to
increase the production
and the introduction of
nitrogen fertilizers
through a process called
the "Haber Bosch reaction."
[airplane motors]
Haber and Bosch, in Germany,
were looking for a better
explosive during the war,
and came up with this way
of breaking up
the bonds of nitrogen in the air
and turning that nitrogen
into an explosive form
that is also
a plant available form.
So out of the chemistry
of war and bombs
came out the first
synthetic nitrogen fertilizer.
[motor on device starting up]
Then what happened was,
as World War II came to a close,
and the fertilizers
became available
on a very inexpensive basis...
That was just at the time
when there...
was a limited amount
of new prairie to go to,
and so it came as
the saving grace.
And I still remember my father
the first time he started
using fertilizer,
and he saw the response
that he got from that,
and he said we could never farm
without fertilizer again.
As we increase
the amount of nitrogen input
to natural ecosystems,
what is the response of
the ecosystem itself to that?
I mean my father,
when he before he started
applying fertilizers,
he went to
our county extension agent,
he went to every farmer
whose judgment he trusted.
And his single question was,
"Is this gonna hurt my land?"
The use of nitrogen fertilizer
removed a limiting factor
from the agricultural ecosystem
so of course it yielded a very
high increase in productivity.
But it also produced
very high demands on the soil.
Demands in the form of
increased pesticide use,
the demand for other nutrients,
the demand for very high inputs
of water and fossil fuels
through all kinds of ways,
especially through
the mechanization
of the agricultural ecosystem.
All these elements put together
composed a regime
that is called
the Green Revolution.
And the poster children
for the Green Revolution
were Mexico and India.
[sounds of bustling market]
As a child when
I used to walk into the fields,
I used to feel the soil
was so soft and nice.
And whenever I came home
in the holidays,
I found it becoming sick
day by day.
I didn’t know everything
can be done without chemicals.
My father was
one of the pioneers
of the Green Revolution.
He visited
the Ludhiana University,
got the new seeds and everything
he did according to the book,
what the university and
the chemical guys had preached.
And now here I am,
trying to undo
the wrong done
by the Green Revolution.
This is the wheat crop,
which I have been growing
since the last 27 years.
But as a chemical farmer,
I used to have a bumper crop,
very nice crops.
Maybe two tons
of wheat per acre.
But now, the first year
I stopped using the chemicals,
it went down just to half a ton.
What happened was
that the soil was sick.
It was waterlogged,
it was compact due
to heavy machineries,
and I was not replacing
the carbon,
the biomass,
which I should have.
Weeds were a problem,
they used to overshadow
all my crop,
but this year the weeds
are lower than the wheat.
And these weeds are basically,
they are wild clover,
which are a legume.
The legumes
are the lungs of the soil,
so they catch all of the free
nitrogen and feed it back.
Nitrogen is the key
to a happy soil
and happy plants growing,
and nitrogen also
breaks down the carbon material
which we plow in our fields.
There are two very fundamentally
different outcomes
agriculture can bring to a soil.
It can improve it or degrade it.
Agriculture's not
necessarily destructive.
And the difference depends on
how one treats the soil.
If you look at the history of
many ancient civilizations,
they share a common storyline.
Farming starts in the valley
bottoms next to rivers,
in the soils that are
delivered by the rivers
from soils eroded off
of upland environments
that refreshes the fertility
of the valley bottoms
very naturally.
Year after year, as floods come,
it deposits a new layer of silt,
the soil's built over time.
Those are environments
that can sustain agriculture
for a long period of time
because the soil's
refreshed naturally.
In a very broad sense,
if you look at the history of
Western civilization,
you can trace it
from the original
floodplain-based agriculture
along the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers and the Nile River...
And many ancient civilizations
began in alluvial environments
as river-oriented civilizations.
What they found is that
they could grow more food
on smaller pieces of land
and support lots of people,
so their populations
started to grow.
And as populations spread up
into upland environments,
to the hillsides,
the same farming techniques
were brought up
onto the hillsides.
When you plow
on any kind of a slope,
it gradually pushes material
quite literally downhill
with each pass of the plow.
But it only takes
a few centuries
to a thousand years to erode
through the soils
with plow-based agriculture
on hillsides.
And Greece sort of plowed
through their hillside soils,
and then to Rome,
and the Romans
really loved to plow.
They would plow
6 to 9 times a year,
depending on the kind of soil.
And they quite literally
plowed the soil right off
Roman heartland over
the course of a few centuries...
A couple centuries B.C.
to the time that Rome
eventually collapsed.
Western Europe,
parts of which plowed
through their hillside soils,
and parts of which didn’t.
And then to North America,
the great American push West
was fueled, if you will,
by the exhaustion of soils
on the Eastern Seaboard,
as plantations and people
spread out West
in search of new fertile soils.
So one of the fundamental things
that happened
when the plow
came to the Plains,
whether in Europe
or North America,
was that by laying the soil
bare and exposed
for substantial portions
of the year,
wind and rain were able to
actually work erosionally
much faster than they were
under native vegetation.
[sound of heavy machinery]
When I was a kid growing up,
every spring in March
we’d have the spring runoff.
The mud and the water
used to come down
and boy, I’m telling you,
this was back in the days
of conventional farming.
And all this water,
from these hilltops and
these side hills, would go right
down through around the house
just around the corner
down there.
A wall of water
came out of this draw,
three feet high,
hit the back of the house,
broke the windows out,
and it flooded the house,
and they just opened the doors
and let the water run through.
After about several hours,
it turned to mud.
And then the mud would come.
Filled the cellar full of mud.
Every year.
And then I took a bulldozer and
I went around the house,
and I uncovered the house,
you know, from the mud.
All that came down
out of these fields,
and this is very, very typical
of the whole entire area
in these hills.
Then it became my turn to farm.
There just had to be
a better way to do it.
The direct seeding or no-till,
what it does,
is it’s like a big compost bed.
We leave all the standing
stubble and residue in place,
except we roll the straw out
of the seed row.
We put it in the center here.
Because it’s not disturbed
from year to year,
you get worm activity going on
down here in the straw.
You’ll see the soil
is really granulated at the top,
and then as we go down
through the profile,
you’ll see here all the worm...
the worm holes.
And of course, the worm hole
is full of worm castings,
very very good fertilizer.
The earthworms aerate the soil,
they let the moisture go in,
and then they provide channels
for the roots to grow,
oxygen to flow.
And all the organisms,
things you can't see,
all grow in that area too.
We don’t plow it,
we don’t disc it,
we don’t do anything.
We leave it
and it gets deeper and deeper.
It’s eaten by the organisms
and dissolves and turns back
into plant food.
We found when we plow
we actually get
an explosion of earthworms
if we’re plowing
in a good green cover crop.
You know, just because
when a conventional farmer
plows all the time and
he loses all his worms
doesn't mean
the plow is killing them.
From what I'm seeing,
I would believe that probably
it's the fact
that he's not putting
any food down for them
that's killing them.
So this piece of ground
has just recently been tilled,
and there's nothing
growing on it right now.
So the main process going on
in the soil right now
would be
that decomposition process
so the breakdown
of organic compounds in the soil
and the release of nutrients.
And that's one of the reasons
why farmers,
for thousands of years,
have tilled the soil,
because it stimulates
decomposition.
And because the tillage process
breaks up some soil aggregates
and makes carbon that
might have been protected
previously more available
for the organisms.
Carbon is actually
the key nutrient that drives
the life of organisms
in the soil.
Soil organisms
are desperate for carbon,
the more carbon
you add to the soil,
the more they like
to burn it up.
When you move
to an agricultural system,
you’re removing nutrients
from the soil
in the form
of those harvested plants.
Nutrients have to come back
into the soil
to replenish the soil.
The most important thing that
we could do right now is
to take seriously what
Sir Albert Howard called
the "law of return."
What he meant by that was
the best way
to enhance and retain
the living capacity of the soil
and its capacity
for self-renewal
is to return to the soil
all of those things
that we use...
that we get from the soil.
Now this is
how we make our compost.
We have all
the raw material here.
Basically we are creating
a body.
Straw is the carbon,
the 50% of the compost
is made of carbon.
The 25% we put in green matter.
so we try to bring the nitrogen
by putting the green matter.
And 25%, we have the dung,
may it be the cow dung
or the buffalo dung.
On every layer we put
a biodynamic inoculation.
And this is the rock phosphate.
A pinch of lime
does not let the nitrogen
fly up as ammonia.
It’s an art of making compost.
That stuff, when it decomposes,
it becomes this...
it will take another 20 days
maybe,
it has been given two turnings
and you can look
at the rich compost
and it's all greasy.
Greasy means
these are the byproducts
of the microbes
which have eaten away.
And the more greasy it is,
the better.
There's a lot of humus in it.
And it smells like jungle soil.
[heavy machinery noise]
So what you're looking at here
is about a 20-acre site
in which we bring food scraps
and other materials
from San Francisco,
the whole Bay Area,
and we compost them
into a material
that can be used on farms.
This is about one million pounds
of recycled organic food
and recycled organic
green waste.
Our soils are starving
for this organic matter.
I am the sheet mulch queen.
So we don't grow plants.
We grow soil,
and soil grows plants.
We actually built up
eight inches of topsoil
in about five years.
And now it's up
to 12 inches of topsoil.
The organic matter level
in this soil
has increased dramatically
from about 4% or 5%
to over almost 18%.
And scientists
will tell you this doesn't work,
but it does and you can see it.
This soil just goes down and
down and down and down
deep, rich.
Now it didn't start off
like that.
If you can take with this soil,
which is about the poorest soil
in the British Isles,
and produce healthy
economic crops
year after year,
decade after decade,
with the soil improving
every year,
then I see no reason why
this can't happen anywhere.
Like many organic farmers,
we were also buying in
organically-approved inputs.
- Absolutely, yeah...
- Chicken manures,
rock phosphates, lime,
all the other things that many
organic farmers...
And that's stopped.
We don't do anything like that.
But a lot of organic growers
still do this.
They have an organic version
of the conventional mode,
if you like.
But it's a shortcut to problems,
which we found to our cost.
And so we've now found
that the compost,
as well as helping the disease,
soil disease problems,
has its own nutrient value
anyway
and has reactivated
the soil biology.
And so now we're in this rather
happy situation of saving money,
because we only use compost,
and our only inputs are seeds
and compost.
[liquid gurgling]
Here we have a forced
aerobic compost tea brewer.
It’s mimicking
the motion of the creek.
And it’s loaded with
aerobic soil biology.
[gushing water]
So 70%
of our fresh water resources
on this planet now are used just
for agricultural irrigation.
And we’re drawing down
our fresh water resources
all across the planet at an
absolutely unsustainable rate.
Now this well is at least
more than 150 years old.
And we had
a water level of 30 feet.
That was just 40 years back,
just 40 years back I'm saying.
Thirty feet. And now today,
the water level,
the ground water is 100 feet.
So there's a drop of 70 feet.
In China, for example,
where 80% of grain
is dependent on irrigation,
they’re drawing down
their ground water,
some places already pumping
from 1,000 feet deep.
Here in the United States,
where the Ogallala Aquifer
provides most of the irrigation
water for the heartland,
that’s been drawn down
by half since 1960.
In California a big impact,
particularly
in Southern California
but also in any arid region
of the world where we irrigate,
is salinization of the soil.
And applying a lot of water,
the water evaporates,
and leaves behind salts.
The loss
of productive agricultural soils
due to salinization equals that
now of losses due to erosion.
And so this is why
10 million hectares of land
are being abandoned annually
in the world
because of salinization.
So we use dripper lines.
Dripper lines use
vastly less water
and less electricity to bring
water to your field crops.
We planted the lines of broccoli
down the outside.
And we planted tatsoi,
a wonderful Asian green,
down the middle.
The benefit is,
if you are looking
at this bed from the top now,
you actually can’t see the soil,
which means the sun
isn’t reaching the soil.
So the soil is staying shaded,
it’s staying moist,
reducing the weed competition
and therefore
reducing our labor.
It also reduces evaporation,
so it means we can water less.
We make about 200 to 300 yards
of our own compost every year
entirely from materials
here on the farm.
And that goes into our fields,
a couple of inches thick
in every bed row.
It helps maintain water
moisture in the soil.
We have friends and neighbors
who are irrigating
about 3 or 4 hours
of drip per day,
and we’re doing about 1 hour
of drip per week.
That’s the difference in terms
of feeding your soil.
That allows us to use a 10th
or a 20th of the water
that some of our neighbors
are using
in this exact same environment
here in California,
where we have a dry season,
a long dry season.
Here what we see is soil
from the Rodale Institute
Farming Systems Trial.
We have 300 milliliters of water
that is gonna be introduced
to 1000 grams of soil.
Here is the simulated rainfall.
Did you see that we’re having
runoff now?
And this runoff is actually
showing the erosion
of the soil particles.
And we're gonna see
somewhat different effect
when we have organic soil,
related to
the increased organic matter.
You see that there is
some runoff occurring,
but the runoff is much clearer,
and there's more water that
is being absorbed into the soil.
When you add compost
to the organic soil,
the loss is less than a hundred.
When we have the mulch and
the organic system and compost,
there’s more water that
is being absorbed into the soil.
Now you see how clear
the water is here.
As we improve the soil,
we get much less runoff.
One of the ways of avoiding
catastrophic floods
is by improving our soil.
Now we're gonna
take these beakers out,
and we're gonna show you what's
happening below the surface.
If we look at the bottom of
our containers,
we see that actually
there's no water
that runs through
the conventional soil.
So that you're not getting
anything that could be supplying
the aquifers, the water storage
that is underground,
or the surface rivers because
of the poor nature of the soil.
But as we use
these organic soil methods
and we create an organic soil,
what we see is
that we're getting
not only less water loss
on the surface,
but we're getting water charge
in the subsurface
which is feeding our aquifers
and our surface streams.
So this is very good for
our natural resources
and most of our water comes from
underground water sources.
So we've watched here
at the Rodale Institute
over the years is when
we have drought years,
our organic fields
can produce 30% to 70%
more corn or more soybeans,
because there's
the organic matter in that soil,
than a conventional chemical
synthetic-based farm ever could.
So when they talk about
what we need is bio-engineered
plants for drought resistance,
we're kind of slapping
our foreheads and going, "What?
"What we need is healthy soil
with organic matter in it."
And you don't have to put a bio-
engineered gene into that plant.
You can out-produce conventional
by a whole bunch
by just improving that soil.
Here we have a new technique
called "organic no-till,"
and you can see
that the soil is covered
with a cover crop
that is rolled down.
When we put a mat on it,
the materials that are in it
are high in the nitrogen that is
needed for the corn plant.
We get both the fertility
and the better
resource conservation.
In my gardens, I grow
two things all the time:
50% for people, which
is the potato in this case,
and 50% of the land for nature,
the soil improvement
cycling crops.
It's very important.
Without a balance
between the two,
things will collapse.
In my gardens and in the gardens
of the future, I believe,
we need to recognize and feed
nature as we feed humanity.
And so I grow this crop of
mixed soil-improvement plants.
You can call them weeds
they're mustards and vetches
and clovers and a wide range
of different plants in here,
and as well as potatoes.
There are no bugs,
there are no disorders of
any kind out here,
it all transpires.
And the potato plant
has not yet come to bloom,
and it's an immature potato
plant at this time of year.
But we'll harvest one just to
examine what it looks like.
We see large masses
of fibrous root systems,
and we see nice soft
crumbly soils
that have good aggregation
to them held together
by yeasts and molds
and bacterial colonies
filled with fibrous,
small root systems.
And there's the mother potato,
and it's just beginning
to fruit,
and it has a few small
new potatoes.
And it weighed about
two-and-a-half or three ounces
and it's still solid.
It has yet to be drained,
it's just barely begun.
Generally
under this circumstance,
I will plant one potato,
in this garden,
under the way I garden,
I'll plant one potato and I will
get 14 equal-sized potatoes.
This is also part of nature.
Humanly trained, I'm afraid.
Well, that's the end
of the potato story.
[woman's laughter]
In the US, there's
a hundred million head of cattle
that are grazing the land,
seven million sheep,
and four million horses.
And the US Department
of Agriculture reports that
we have a serious
overgrazing problem.
And of course that contributes
to increased soil erosion.
Not as bad as Africa,
where they've almost totally
stripped all the grass
off the land.
About five years ago,
we certified
our cattle as organic.
And in doing so, we stopped
any inputs to the soil
and plants,
but we also stopped using
parasiticides
or any antibiotics.
And we were walking around,
and I remember 2 or 3 years ago,
we looked at some cow patties.
And we noticed some holes
in the cow patties.
And I remember talking
to my sister, Ginnie,
saying, "Do you remember
"when we were growing up,
we'd see cow patties
"filled with holes, then
the cow patty would disappear?"
"They're back!
"Whatever's doing that,
it's doing it again."
The parasiticides that
we give to the cows
come out very concentrated
in their manure.
It ended up killing
the natural dung beetle
that was here.
And it didn't kill them all,
they just started to recover
when we stopped using
those parasiticides.
The dung beetles take
little packets
and they make little balls
that they carry up to four feet
away from that dung pile...
So what you're actually doing is
spreading the fertility around,
aerating the soil,
and they're doing their job.
Because the cow patty,
if we don't have the dung beetle
and they don't move, you end up
with a burned hole in the grass
from the high nitrogen content
of the manure and the shading.
And as it decomposes, that's
where the increasers come.
That's where we end up
having thistles
and weed problems.
So truth be known,
we've actually had
a reduction in weed problems
after certifying organic.
We've also had
an increase in productivity.
Because the soils are healthier,
the microbes
and the critters in the soil
are coming back to life.
Properly managed grazing is
the best thing that can happen
to our California grasslands.
For millennia, animals have been
part of agriculture.
And that’s because they’re
an important part of our diet,
but also they’re a unique way
of breaking down organic matter,
breaking down plants
and returning them to the soil
in a way that feeds
the microorganisms in the soil,
so that they can keep
making those minerals
in that cycle available
to the next plants
that are growing.
(Ignacio Chapela)
In traditional agriculture,
animals were
an integral part of the farm
because they returned nutrients,
especially nitrogen,
into the soil in their manure.
But as we moved into
industrial agriculture
and removed those animals,
we created two problems.
Large accumulations of manure,
which means a lot of nitrogen
in the wrong place,
and soils that were depleted
of their nutrients
so that we now have farmers
who are dependent
on synthetic fertilizer.
About half of the fertilizer
that we add,
half of the nitrogen fertilizer
is lost from the system
right away,
and about half is taken up
by the crop.
And that's the average.
It can be much higher.
In vegetable systems,
you can end up losing
80% of the nitrogen.
(Ignacio Chapela)
Small amounts of nitrogen
are continuously brought
into an ecosystem
by bacteria,
which fix the nitrogen from the
air into a plant-available form.
In organic farming,
leguminous cover crops
and manure
add nitrogen to the soil.
There is minimum
leakage of nitrogen
in these organic farming
ecosystems
because the nitrogen
is released slowly,
and most of it is taken up
again by living organisms.
When synthetic
nitrogen fertilizer
is introduced into the field,
plants can use it
to produce more biomass,
and for a farmer,
this represents higher yield.
But plants can only use
a limited amount
of that nitrogen fertilizer,
so some farmers use more
and more fertilizer
to get smaller and smaller
increases in yield.
Excess nitrogen is released
into the ecosystem
and forms of this nitrogen
go into the air
as potent green house gases.
Fertilizing nitrogen
also leaks into the soil
and into the water system,
creating a range of problems,
from nitrates in drinking water
to the eutrophication
of water ways
and ultimately,
dead zones in the ocean.
You end up with a lot of
extra nutrients in those waters,
and that causes algae to bloom,
the plankton take off.
Then they die,
they sink down to the bottom.
And while they're decomposing,
the oxygen demand goes up.
So all of a sudden,
where there was oxygen
to support fish, shrimp,
and other shellfish,
there isn't any,
so they all die.
Then you've got even more dead
organic biomass to decompose.
In the Gulf dead zone,
the average size for the last
few years has been about
7,000 square miles.
About the size
of the state of New Jersey.
There is one dead zone,
the one in the Black Sea,
which was the largest dead zone
in the world,
that disappeared
for about ten years,
because,
when the Soviet Union collapsed,
they could no longer
afford fertilizers.
So that's promising. It means
we can do something about it
if we change our practices.
The strategy
that we need to use
is to look at improving
our field efficiency,
and this has implication
for greenhouse gases,
including carbon dioxide
production.
Because this synthetic nitrogen
that we're using
is extremely costly
in terms of energy,
which means it produces
a lot of carbon dioxide.
This accounts for about 50% of
the energy use in agriculture.
So if we're continuing to just
use it at a 50% efficiency,
we have the environmental
consequences
of the leakiness
and also of the energy use
and all the pollution that
occurs from manufacturing it.
One strategy that has
a huge impact is to just
modify rotation so that
you have cover crops
alternating with the cash crops.
And we conducted a study
of all the research
that's been done
looking at cover crops,
and we found that,
on the average, if you
introduce cover crops
into an annual rotation
like corn and soybeans,
you reduce nitrate
leaching by 70%.
So that's a huge reduction.
A healthy soil is a fundamental
part of a healthy grapevine.
Of course the fundamental
of healthy soil
is adding organic matter
to the soil.
So if we came out here
in February or March,
we’d be up to our chest
in peas, oats, vetches,
cover crops that
we’ve grown to add
organic matter back to the soil,
along with the compost that
we make from our grape pumice.
And here’s a nice earthworm, and
we can just see this is
like chocolate cake basically.
And this just smells so good!
This is gonna provide all that
this grapevine needs now
to provide great grapes
with deep flavor.
We came out here
and into another vineyard
in the Napa Valley, but there’s
really something fundamentally
different about this vineyard,
is that the soil itself
really doesn’t have a lot
to contribute to this grapevine
or to these eventual grapes.
And the reason is
that they’ve not added
organic matter back to the soil,
and therefore, as you can see,
it's become hard and compacted,
so it’s really become dirt,
not soil.
We started this farm
back in 1974.
One of the things
they told us was that
we wouldn’t really be able to
farm organically in California
because California
is an arid climate.
I mean, even here on the coast,
we have a lot of rain,
30 inches of rain annually.
But it all occurs in a matter
of four months.
So we have a long period
of arid conditions.
And we were told that
probably you weren't gonna
be able to farm organically
in any commercially
successful way
because you couldn't get
the humus levels high enough
to have the bacteria in
the soil hold the nitrogen
and the fertility elements that
it needed for the crops.
It hasn't been difficult.
In the early years, we would do
really what we're doing now.
In the fall,
we plant cover crops.
In the spring,
we plow those down and
then start planting
and put out compost.
In fact, we’re farming
organically
all over the state now.
This farm is the oldest
certified organic farm
in California.
Once we changed
and we started to compost
our livestock manure
and put that back on the soil,
we used green-manure cover crops
and incorporated
that biomass back into the soil.
Within three years,
and even our neighbors,
who would walk
across the fields, saying,
"Your soil's so spongy,
now what did you do?"
And it was that living,
that return of the life
of the soil.
Within 2 to 3 years,
you can make a tremendous
difference in soil,
honoring that law of return.
For 28 years,
this area has received
conventional agriculture.
And one of the things that
you'll see here
is that the corn
is actually spindly
and yellow,
and this is related to...
the soil has not improved
during the experiment.
This comes from long-term
organic management.
One of the things is that
people would freak out
with these weeds because
they would say that they're
taking away from the crop.
But our long-term data shows
that we can produce even more
in these organic systems than
in the conventional systems.
So that a lot of this
has to do with
how you view things.
Can you let life live?
One herbicide that was
really touted was glyphosate.
The trade name is RoundUp.
The testing that they did before
the product came on the market
was only on
the active ingredient itself,
not on the actual
formulated product.
Not only does glyphosate
destroy mycorrhizae in the soil,
they can actually decrease
levels of beneficial
soil microorganisms and increase
the level of harmful ones.
Over 95% of the soybeans
in the US
are genetically engineered.
What is that trait that
is engineered into them?
They’re called
"RoundUp Ready" soybeans!
They’re designed
to be used with RoundUp.
So, where we've gone in
and destroyed
the biology in the soil,
we have to be putting on
inorganic fertilizers,
we have to use pesticides,
we're going to have weeds.
So it becomes this
downward chemical cycle.
[helicopter blades churning]
Over 10,000 agrichemicals
have been registered
for use in
agricultural production systems.
So what we have
is a deadly cocktail
that has developed.
(Ignacio Chapela) Over
1.1 billion pounds of pesticides
worth $25 billion
are used each year,
much of it ending up
in soil and water.
US companies have submitted
applications to the EPA
to get approval for corn
that is engineered
to be resistant to 2,4-D,
which has been linked to
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
2,4-D is an herbicide that
was in Agent Orange.
Atrazine is an herbicide that
is used to control weeds
in crops.
In the case of atrazine,
and nitrate, especially those
two mixed together,
nitrates shut off
your defenses to your body
against toxic chemicals,
and so it's like tying
your hands behind your back.
We found that
common lawn-chemical mixtures
at very low concentrations
can induce abortions and
resorptions of fetuses.
This is something that was
not expected, but the greatest
interest here is that
the greatest effects were
at the lowest doses,
not the highest doses.
Fetuses are exquisitely
sensitive to
very small concentrations
of chemicals.
These chemicals
can completely alter
developmental trajectories.
Abundance of nitrate
and atrazine
is associated with
human birth defects,
baby male genitalia problems,
learning abilities
in terms of math skills
and in terms of language skills.
Kids who are conceived
in these months when
these pesticide concentrations
in water are high,
have higher probabilities
of all these kinds
of developmental problems
and fertility problems.
Everything we are
is made of the soil.
The food we eat
is a produce of the soil.
If we have declared
a war against the soil itself,
if we ensure that
the fertility through which
the human species can continue
is robbed from the soil,
then we are literally committing
a species-level suicide.
If this soil
is healthy and balanced,
this cabbage plant is going
to be healthy and balanced,
the corn plant will be healthy.
So that when we eat the crops
we’re going to be healthy.
What I'm seeing
by tending this farm
is that the soil here
is very, very healthy,
you end up getting
this whole food web.
How do the various species
and organisms
within a system
interact with each other
and benefit from each other?
And how can you then
in agriculture organize those
in a way that you get
those synergies,
those benefits
from the synergies?
One of the really exciting
things here is that
we have
this working relationship
between the farmers and
the chefs in the restaurant.
Well, there’s something
really special
about working
with passionate chefs.
To get that good carrot,
you’ve got to have good ecology
behind the carrot.
It’s grown in the right soil,
it has the right amendments
in the soil,
it's picked at the right moment,
all these issues
that improve
your overall local ecology.
Generally if that carrot’s so
delicious, it’s locally grown.
Blue Hill Restaurant here is
well-recognized now,
not only throughout
the community,
but throughout the country,
and even to some extent
throughout the world,
as that’s where you’re going to
have the best meal of your life.
And as those meals go out,
I occasionally catch a taste and
just see the presentation,
what he’s trying to get across.
Which is really just trying to
get across this awareness
of relation to the food.
I think the answers are on these
little microbiological levels.
Because it translates, for me,
going back to flavor.
And you cannot have good flavor
without that kind
of attention to detail,
and knowledge of the biology,
and knowledge of the chemistry,
knowledge of these interactions
that are going on
on a soil level that are
key to health and to flavor.
And that to me
is hugely inspiring.
The best economic returns
are from
the best vegetables and fruits
and even meats that
are grown in the right way.
So here we do not bring
any outside inputs
for either our livestock or
our horticulture operations.
Everything that’s used here,
and all of the waste
that’s produced here,
gets composted and
put back into the system.
Just like the carrot is not
the carrot is not the carrot,
compost is not compost
is not compost.
I thought you make compost,
you make compost, right?
But there’s a recipe to that
as interesting and as profound
and as important as the recipes
that I’m making in the kitchen.
And if you have
the biology right,
you’re going to taste these
different levels of flavor.
The success that
we've had in our food system,
over the last, 70 years or so
has been due to a unique
convergence of circumstances.
One is this incredible supply
of cheap energy
in the form of oil
and natural gas and coal.
We saw in the UK in the year 2000
when the lorry drivers
went on strike,
and there were no lorries moving
and there was no fuel,
liquid fuels,
we came about a day
and a half away
from a major food crisis
in this country.
Because it became very clear
that we had no food resilience
to fall back on.
So the real question is:
What kind of food system
are we gonna transition to
when we no longer have
these cheap fossil fuels
that provide the fertilizer
and the equipment
and everything else that's made
these highly specialized
production systems possible?
People think, it's not
gonna be such a big problem
because
there's alternative energy.
So all we gotta do
is switch from
Mid East oil to
corn-based ethanol from Iowa,
and then, problem solved.
Biofuels in the United States
are being produced with corn.
99.9% are with corn.
Corn production in the US
causes more soil erosion
than any other crop
grown in the nation,
Number One.
Number Two,
corn production uses
more nitrogen fertilizer
than any other crop
grown in the nation.
And the leakage of the nitrogen
goes down the Mississippi,
and the National Academy of
Sciences indicate
that corn production
is the prime cause
of the dead zone down
in the Gulf of Mexico.
Another, corn production uses
more insecticides,
more herbicides than any
other crop grown in the nation.
Because it takes 40%
more fossil energy
to produce
that gallon of ethanol,
that means that
there's significant contribution
to the global warming
or carbon dioxide
because of the excess
fossil energy used.
Oh, I should mention the water:
It takes 1,700 gallons of water
to produce 1 gallon of ethanol.
A very inconvenient side effect
that could happen
from a very aggressive move
towards biofuels is that,
if we grow the crops that would
provide those fuels in ways
that are as erosive as
conventional agriculture
is now for growing corn, say,
we could be in a situation
where we're essentially trading
a system that mines oil
for a system that mines soil.
In which case,
we've just changed the timeframe
over which we're going
to engineer disaster.
We didn't ask the question,
as we, use more land and
put pressure on more farmers
to produce more corn
to both provide for the feed
and for the fuel,
and on top of that, the exports,
where are we gonna get
the additional land from?
We sort of kidded ourselves
into believing that
we could just increase
the yields rapidly enough
so we don't have to worry
about more land,
and of course that
hasn't worked that way.
I think what happened
in science,
and I come from
a science background,
is we became too reductionistic
and we started to look at
things too narrowly.
And what the healthy soil
conversation is about
is really about
the whole biological system.
And rarely do we investigate
things as a system.
In 1984 there was
a drought in the south,
and lots of animals were dying,
and there was migration.
So I studied the region,
and I found the rain
hadn't reduced.
So why was there a drought
when the rain was the same?
And it turned out that
new seeds had been brought
that reduced the plant height,
got rid of the straw.
There was no straw for the soil,
there was no straw
for the fodder for animals.
So your rainfall was the same,
but you had a soil drought
because your organic matter
had not returned.
You had a fodder drought
because you had now redesigned,
in this case the sorghum,
to produce more grain
for the market
at the cost of less
organic matter
for the soil and for animals.
60% of our ecological systems
are now reaching
the point of collapse.
If that were to happen,
then it will fundamentally
change
the functioning of the planet.
Now I don't know if everybody
grasps the meaning of
"fundamentally changing
the functions of the planet,"
but that really means that
the planet could evolve
into a kind of climate
that's not very good
for us as a human species.
How do we continue
to produce
an adequate amount of food
for a population
of 6.5 billion people
and getting larger?
We have increasing energy costs,
depleting water resources,
and more unstable climates and
more severe weather events.
They have to be addressed
in terms of
fundamentally changing the way
in which we produce our food,
which makes it more resilient.
And the only thing
that really looks promising
is to get back to
the fundamentals of the soil.
We can sequester over 3 tons
of carbon dioxide per acre
with organic
regenerative methods,
whereas conventional
chemical-based agriculture
emits carbon dioxide.
So we would solve
so many problems
if we would just get the biology
back into the soil.
Stop killing it!
When the colonialists
came here in New England,
this became a key area
to produce food
for the Burlington area.
In the middle
of the 20th century,
we began to see the
transformation of agriculture,
so that local food production
began to move further
and further away.
Those farms essentially became
difficult to stay in business
as they competed with
food from around the planet.
And when we got here,
which was 30 years ago,
there was one farm left:
the last dairy in Burlington,
run by a 90-plus-year-old woman,
and she was just hanging on.
We started to take on the
restoration of this flood plain,
which had become
a dumping ground
for the city of Burlington.
And we saw this as
just an exciting opportunity
to imagine the transformation
of the food system which was
what our business was about:
producing local food
in your garden.
This is a flood plain
sandy soil.
We had lost almost all
the organic matter in the soil.
One of the things we could do
is we could take all the waste
from the community
in terms of food waste
and yard waste, and instead
of taking it to the dump,
we could put it into
a compost project.
That compost has brought
the fertility back up to
4% or 5% organic matter
in the soil.
That then gave us
the capacity
to incubate and create the farms
that are down here now.
1/10th of 1% of the food
eaten in Burlington
was coming from Burlington,
and we had a goal of
"Could it become 10%
of the fresh food?"
We’re in Vermont, it’s cold,
so you can’t do it all year,
but we’re getting awfully close
to 10% of Burlington’s
fresh food
that’s consumed here now being
produced here in the Intervale.
There are now 13 farms
down here, they share
greenhouses,
tractors and irrigation.
They are now sharing
refrigeration
and distribution,
so we have a food hub
that actually aggregates
their available excess supply
and gets it out efficiently
into the community.
We actually have
about a dozen employers
who have supported
the idea of a CSA
where we actually
are distributing weekly
to their employees,
we deliver right
to their places of employment.
So the employers began to
realize the value of local food,
health and connecting
their employees
to the local food system.
This is not
just happening in Vermont.
It’s happening
all over the country.
So we have people
knocking on our door
saying, "Could we
do this in our community?"
The simplest answer is make sure
you’ve got fertile soil.
If you don’t,
figure out how to get there.
And get it accessible
so that it’s not too expensive
for people to farm.
Make sure that you can
support young people
to be able to be successful
at farming,
and make sure
that the market is there
so that they can make
a good living.
You put those things together
in a dynamic,
interrelated way
where policy plays a role,
but ultimately,
it’s the economic system
that is that which is driving,
I think, our future success.
One of the things
that works here,
and in many old cities
you have that same situation,
is a forgotten bunch of land
next to rivers
that actually are fairly fertile
and could be
brought back to life.
And sort of the integration
of people to agriculture is...
a lot of what this
new food system is about.
One seed you plant,
you get a thousand.
Thousands seeds you plant,
you get a million.
Fertility really is
the power of the soil
to keep producing.
The power of the seed
to keep reproducing,
year after year after year.
[man chanting]
It was called the "IAASTD,
"the International Assessment
for the Role of Agricultural
"Science, Knowledge and
Technology in Development."
And it was basically,
"What’s the answer
for world agriculture?"
and after a 4-year process,
in 2008 the final report
came out
and they basically said,
that the answer
is not high tech.
Genetic engineering is not going
to save agriculture.
Neither is nanotechnology or
these high tech solutions.
But the answer is
this more ecologically-
rational agroecology.
The question is:
"Can organic, sustainable
agroecology feed the world?"
Sure, it can.
And I know this because
I was involved myself
a lot of research in Africa.
We have quadrupled,
up to even 10 times, more yield,
totally sustainable,
organic actually,
by doing the right thing
and by building soil.
So the yields go up
year after year,
to reach levels which,
if every African farmer
would produce
according to some
of those systems,
there would be plenty of food
around for everybody.
But...there’s a but here too,
it doesn’t fill the pockets of
a few business people.
It just helps the farmer
and the consumer.
And we have to widen this stem
to make sure that
there’s more connections
from farm to consumer
and also more people in between.
It’s important because
agriculture needs input-output,
no matter what you do.
And you can imagine two possible
alternative futures,
if we continue
to aggressively pursue
plow-based
conventional agriculture
the way that we are
at present...
We'll eventually deplete
the supply of soil.
Eventually the areas
of highly fertile,
highly productive
agricultural soils
will become very valuable
and fought-over.
They will become sort of
the central organizing element
of the geopolitical reality.
Why? Well because soil is
THE fundamental resource.
On the other hand,
agricultural techniques
like intensive organic
agriculture and no-till
that can produce
large crops of food
without depleting the soil
and in many cases,
actually improving soil quality.
It would encourage small-scale
labor-intensive organic farms
that would supply
what's coming to be known
as the "local food movement."
Two very different futures,
both of them totally possible.
And the mechanisms that may
guide us toward one or the other
are gonna evolve
from what consumers choose to do
with their food dollars,
and what governments
tend to encourage,
subsidize and or penalize
or regulate.
The future is wide open.
Back in the 1960s,
the chemical companies
tried to sell the idea that
chemistry was better
than life forces.
And they called this "better
living through chemistry."
But now through science,
we understand that
there's lots of side effects
from the chemical approaches
to food and agriculture.
So we call this
"better living through biology."
When you go to this system,
the soil returns
to what it was like when
it was first broken out.
You go out there and
you start digging in that,
that's just an awesome thing,
you know?
In the original Hebrew,
Adam is the masculine form
of the Hebrew word "adama."
"Adama" is soil.
So Adam literally
means "earthling,"
and as described in
the second chapter of Genesis,
Adam is fashioned by God
out of "adama,"
out of the earth.
The translation is
"the dust of the earth,"
but it’s really the "afar,"
the material of the soil.
And now the question is:
Adam’s mate.
In Hebrew "Havah,"
or in English rendered Eve.
"Havah" means literally
"life" or "life giver."
So the combination
of Adam and Eve
mean quite literally
soil and life,
perceiving that life is
associated with the soil.
Adam and Eve are placed
in the Garden of Eden,
which means literally
the Garden of Delights,
which is nature,
and given an assignment.
Not mastery,
but a role,
a task:
to serve and preserve.
It says in Hebrew,
"l’ovdah ul’shomrah."
The King James translation says
"to dress it and keep it,"
but my translation is
"to serve it
and to preserve it."
We banish ourselves from the
Garden of Eden by despoiling it.
And when mothers
see their children
playing in the soil now,
they say, "Oh, that’s dirty,"
and they rapidly,
quickly wash their hands
of the dirt.
And we misapply that
terrible word "dirt" to soil,
which is the fount of
all cleanliness, by the way.
Think of all
the many generations
of people in past generations
who’ve died
of all manner of disease,
and somehow
the soil cleanses them all,
and recycles their bodies
into the materials of life.
[children giggling, screaming]
Captioning: LVT - New York